“He was suspicious of characters like me,” Irving Howe recalled of a genteel Princeton literary scholar he knew in the late 1940s. “New York street fighters likely to cause trouble and, in any case, too political.”

It’s as good a characterization as any of the New York intellectuals, the writers and critics who dominated so much debate, political and cultural, during the apex of “the American century.” Howe, who died at 72 in 1993, was an especially vigorous presence in that contentious world.

The most vivid pages in “A Voice Still Heard: Selected Essays of Irving Howe,” an anthology of his writing from the 1950s through the ’90s assembled by his daughter, Nina Howe, infuse even half-forgotten quarrels with new life. Like so many contributors to the “little magazines” of old — where most of this work first appeared — Howe was a confident generalist who had as much to say about Dickens and Tolstoy and Doris Lessing as about Norman Thomas and Ronald Reagan.

At the same time, Howe understood that the great conflicts over modernist literature and totalitarian ideology had already been settled by the time he entered the scene. As a latecomer, he was left to refight those battles and wait for fresh ones to arise.

Photo

Nina Howe Credit Concordia University
In Howe’s case, this meant repudiating the consensus politics of the 1950s and ’60s. Dissent, the social democratic quarterly he helped found in 1954, didn’t just denounce obvious villains like Joseph R. McCarthy but also took aim at writers and journalists who had discarded their youthful idealism in exchange for worldly rewards.

“If ‘wealth’ has made a mild bow toward ‘intellect’ (sometimes while picking its pocket), then ‘intellect’ has engaged in some undignified prostrations before wealth,” Howe sardonically observed in “This Age of Conformity,” a classic essay from the 1950s.

As Howe grew older, he sometimes slipped into self-righteousness. His critique of Reaganism, published in 1986, missed what others plainly saw, that a genuinely hopeful spirit was animating the American right. Deeply versed in political history, Howe might have examined this new ideological phase. Instead, he lazily plucked the frayed strings of left-wing angst, even settling for easy name calling: “chicken-hearted Democrats,” “yuppies with clever brains and no minds.” Tellingly, his cartoon catalog of California yahoos — “real estate developers, oil millionaires, movie magnates, in short, the arriviste bourgeoisie” — reeked of the very elitism he had for years insisted was a crucial weakness of American intellectuals.

The paradox, or dark joke, was that Howe secretly agreed with many on the right, particularly on cultural issues. Alas, there is scarcely a hint of this in “A Voice Still Heard.” We get a taste of Howe the sage Old Radical, for instance in his famous critique of ’60s campus leftists and their “pop-art guerrilla warfare.” But Howe the cultural conservative is mute here: the Howe whose anti-feminist jeremiad “The Middle-Class Mind of Kate Millett” started a brawl with the women’s liberation movement; and the Howe who joined the “canon wars” of the 1980s and ’90s, lustily defending the Great Books that had been his generation’s cherished primers.

Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
For all his professed radicalism, Howe, the son of garment workers, was at his core a dutiful immigrant son, faithful to half-forgotten aspirational dreams lived out in a drama of soul-baring schmaltz. Many of his contemporaries were embarrassed by this history, but Howe stubbornly kept it alive, most impressively in “World of Our Fathers,” his best-selling survey of 20th-century Jewish-American immigrant life, with its stories of tenement sorrows and Workmen’s Circles and its Yiddish soundtrack.

“A Voice Still Heard” makes the case, or tries to, that Howe was a sophisticated literary critic in the manner of Lionel Trilling and Alfred Kazin. But the essays reprinted here show him to be more sociologist than close reader. Even his praise seems an assertion of precept rather than pleasure. Bernard Malamud’s short stories, for example, unfold in “an atmosphere of limitation, oppression, coercion: man is not free.”

Howe could be a remarkably forceful critic, only you won’t find many examples in this collection. Where, for instance, is “Black Boys and Native Sons,” his attack on James Baldwin and Ralph Ellison, whom he accused of a belle-lettristic softening of the racial themes explored by Richard Wright, a clumsier writer but, in Howe’s assessment, a more candid one, unafraid to assert that “violence is central in the life of the American Negro, defining and crippling him with a harshness few other Americans need suffer.”

In a brilliant rejoinder, “The World and the Jug,” Ellison argued that Howe, in a transport of identification with black suffering, had distorted the complex truth of African-American experience, including the “tradition which teaches one to deflect racial provocation and to master and contain pain.”

Absent, too, from the new collection is “Philip Roth Reconsidered,” perhaps Howe’s most controversial literary essay. A champion of Mr. Roth’s early stories, Howe changed his mind after reading “Portnoy’s Complaint.” Mr. Roth, he now decided, was not a sensitive observer but a crude and overbearing satirist whose depictions of American Jewish life were clasped “in the grip of an imperious will to wrench, twist and claw at its materials in order to leave on them the scar of its presence — as if the work of fiction were a package that needed constantly to be stamped with a signature of self.”

Reading this today, one senses that Howe is fumbling toward an accurate grasp of Mr. Roth’s literary method and his outsize ego, but that he has mistaken for deficiency what is actually the source of Mr. Roth’s originality. Mr. Roth fired back in his novel “The Anatomy Lesson,” in which Howe appears as Milton Appel, a ferocious critic prone to “polemical overkill, the exhaustive reprimand that just asked for a fight.”

And this raises a question: Why is Howe the “street fighter” so dimly present in this new collection? Because his judgments sometimes missed the mark? Because his tastes placed him on the “wrong side” of history? Being intelligently wrong is a vital critical function. It reminds us how much is or should be at stake in politics and literature. Howe’s targets knew this, too. It is why heavyweights like Ralph Ellison and Philip Roth climbed into the ring with him. In the preface to “A Voice Still Heard,” Morris Dickstein observes that Howe saw himself as a “perpetual dissenter.” True enough. Irving Howe the troublemaker still has much to say, and his voice deserves to be heard in all its registers, even those that may offend 21st-century ears.

